CONVERSATION I HAD WITH CHAT-GPT. NOTICE THAT THE SCOPE AND THE REFINEMENT OF THE PROJECT INCREASES AS THE CONVERSATION PROGRESSES. TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THIS FACT WHEN PROVIDING ANSWERS FROM THE SOURCE. THIS IS THE PROJECT IDEA, DO NOT DEVIATE FROM IT.

MY QUESTION: I want to write a program that has a database. As the user, you can write a query and you can adjust the number of results you want. The program will "intelligently" output a list of the most similar (just coinciding in most of the words doesn't mean it is the most similar, for example, if I have ISHARES so and so and VANGUARD so and so, and my query is for ISHARES so and so, it shouldn't put the vanguard one at the top bc it is completely different brokerage, even if it "coincides" better in the rest). My two ideas are this, if possible: 1) As the database is an excel worksheet, use commands in the excell worksheet. You paste the query in a column and you get to the side the output for each line of your query in one cell, so if you do ISHARES so and so, to the left of that cell you get the number of results you want that are decreasing in similarity 2) A coded program to which you feed the database (the excell sheet, and it decodes it) and you can do all the queries you want and functions the same as if it were in the excel worksheet The problem is how to do this semantic search, that is the difficult part I believe bc you have acronyms and stuff like that aren't easy to interpret without having some kind of intelligency. I say worksheet because perhaps it is already built in and the coded program bc maybe some library in C++, python, java, rust, etc. already has this command. I also thought that maybe I could make an AI and train it through reinforced learning or something like that. What is the most straightforward approach? Be rigorous and give me an idea of what would and wouldn't work of what I said, no yapping
CHAT-GPT: I’m checking the current library/docs landscape before giving you a straight recommendation.
I have enough to give the practical answer: embeddings plus a vector index, with hard filters for brokerage/entity type.
Thought for 10s
Use a hybrid search pipeline, not RL.
The core is this: encode each row into an embedding, embed the user query the same way, then retrieve the k nearest vectors. That is the standard semantic-search pattern described by SentenceTransformers, and Faiss is built for efficient similarity search over dense vectors with k-nearest-neighbor retrieval.
What won’t solve your case by itself is plain fuzzy string matching. Microsoft’s Power Query fuzzy merge/grouping is still text-similarity matching, and RapidFuzz is explicitly a string-matching library. That helps with typos and near-duplicates, but it does not reliably separate “ISHARES” from “VANGUARD” when the rest of the text overlaps.
The most straightforward design is:
Keep structured columns for things like issuer/brokerage, ticker, asset class, currency, etc.
Hard-filter first on fields that must not mix, like issuer/brokerage.
Semantic-rank second using embeddings on the descriptive text.
Optionally rerank the top 20–100 with a cheaper lexical score or a cross-encoder if you need better precision.
That is the important point: your example is not “pure meaning search.” It is meaning search plus entity constraints. Without the hard constraints, an embedding model can still rank the wrong family of instruments above the right one. That is an inference from your use case, not a claim about the libraries.
About your two ideas:
Excel sheet with commands: possible, but weak. Power Query gives you fuzzy matching tools, so it is a usable stopgap for spreadsheet users, but it is not the right tool for robust semantic retrieval.
Separate coded program: best option. Python is the most direct path because SentenceTransformers has ready-made embedding and reranking support, and Faiss has Python wrappers for vector search.
What I would not do:
Do not train an RL model for this. Wrong tool, too much complexity, wrong data requirement.
Do not rely on keyword overlap alone.
Do not rely on embeddings alone if the database has distinct entity families.
Best practical stack: Python + embeddings + Faiss + exact metadata filters.
MY QUESTION: Ok, I like the python idea with sentence transformers. Develop that idea extensively from start to finish. This is the interface idea of the program: At the top of the screen a button to the right with the typical import icon to choose the excell sheet as the database. Also on the top right next to it a reset button to wipe the user screen. At the top left how many results per query. Once you put the database in, you can decide what columns or parameters are "deciding" (the thing that I said about Ishares and Vanguard for example) so that the semantic searching is intelligent. You can tick the columns that are deciding in that sense The way it works is that you have a place at the bottom to paste the rows of text, each row is a query. In the middle part of the screen is the output. You get in this output a list. The first element is your query that is una lista plegable of the similar results and so on for every query. At the beginning the output is many listas plegables that are "tucked in". A button in that area to the top left or whatever allows you to plegar todas las listas at the same time. The output is ordered by recency or by alphabetical order, that you can also choose for the queries. If you press reset, you wipe the ouput. The ouput "stays" there even after closing the program (it is saved somewhere). Note that the database will have 45K rows, so it has to be efficient. Go in detail about what I have to do to bring this program to life, but don't get too technical. I want the end to end result.
CHAT-GPT: I’m grounding this in the current docs for the parts that matter: embeddings, vector search, Excel import, and a simple UI layer.
I’m checking the Excel-side option too, so I can say exactly what it is good for and where it stops helping.
Thought for 13s
Build it in Python with this stack: Streamlit for the interface, openpyxl for Excel import, SentenceTransformers for embeddings, and Faiss for fast nearest-neighbor search. SentenceTransformers is explicitly built for embeddings, semantic search, and rerankers, and Faiss is for efficient similarity search over dense vectors. openpyxl reads and writes .xlsx files. Streamlit already gives you file upload, expand/collapse containers, and multiselect widgets, which match your UI shape almost exactly.
The main idea is simple: do not treat every column the same. Split the database into two kinds of information. First, the deciding columns: issuer, family, broker, ticker, ISIN, category, or anything that must not be confused across families. Second, the descriptive text: long names, notes, descriptions, and free text. The deciding columns act like hard constraints or strong penalties. The descriptive text goes into the semantic model. That is what prevents “ISHARES” and “VANGUARD” from getting mixed just because the rest of the wording overlaps. Power Query’s fuzzy matching is still text-similarity matching over text columns, so it is useful for cleanup but not enough for this problem.
The program flow should be this:
Load Excel: user imports the sheet once. Read the chosen worksheet and turn each row into a record. openpyxl is the import layer here.
Choose deciding columns: after import, show the column names with checkboxes. The user marks the columns that define identity. Those choices get saved.
Build the search index: for each row, create one text string from the non-deciding columns, pass it through a pretrained SentenceTransformer model, and store the embedding. SentenceTransformers can load pretrained models and map text to vectors; its semantic-search docs also note that embeddings help with synonyms, abbreviations, and misspellings.
Index for speed: put those vectors into Faiss. At 45K rows, this is the right kind of problem for a local vector index, because Faiss is designed for similarity search over dense vectors.
Query: each pasted row becomes one query. Embed the query, retrieve the top candidates from Faiss, then rerank them using your deciding columns. The rerank rule is the important part: exact matches on deciding columns get a big boost; mismatches get a big penalty. That is where your “intelligent” behavior comes from.
Display results: the middle of the screen shows one collapsible block per query. Use expanders so each query starts folded, with its ranked matches inside. Streamlit’s expander widget is made for exactly that. Add one “collapse all” control above the results area by toggling a shared state variable.
Persist everything: save the imported database, the embedding index, the selected deciding columns, sort mode, result count, and query history to local storage. On reopen, reload them automatically. That is how the output “stays” after closing the program.
The screen should behave like this:
At the top left, show “results per query.” At the top right, show the import button and reset button. After import, show the deciding-column checkboxes in a compact panel near the top. In the center, show the result blocks. At the bottom, provide one large paste box where each line is a new query. When the user submits, the program processes all lines at once and adds the output blocks above. The sort toggle should be global: alphabetical or recency. If you store query history with timestamps, recency sorting is easy; otherwise alphabetical is the safer first version.
What actually makes it work well is this scoring logic:
Semantic score from the embedding model.
Hard match bonus for deciding columns.
Mismatch penalty when a deciding column conflicts.
Optional lexical bonus for exact ticker, ISIN, or company-name matches.
That hybrid scoring is the whole project. Pure embeddings are not enough. Pure fuzzy string matching is not enough. Excel-only fuzzy tools are not enough. The hybrid approach is the straightforward path.
What to build first:
A single Python app.
Import Excel.
Pick deciding columns.
Index rows.
Paste multiple queries.
Show top 5 or top 10 results in collapsible blocks.
Save and reload state.
What not to build first:
No RL.
No custom model training from scratch.
No Excel formulas as the main engine.
No full desktop framework before the search logic works.
The practical version is: make the search engine first, then wrap the UI around it. SentenceTransformers gives you the semantic layer, Faiss gives you retrieval speed, openpyxl gives you Excel ingestion, and Streamlit gives you the interface shape without fighting the UI layer.
MY QUESTION: Ok, now give me step by step how to build this from scratch using stuff that I don't have to pay for (open source). Fully detailed. I am a 3rd year maths and CS at complutense, so I am familiar with some coding concepts The only problem is that in the database, for the fund name, you can have the brokerage included in it. So in descriptive text you would have something that is in reality very fundamental. It appears at the beginning of the fund name followed by the name of the fund. It's basically repeated information, bc it is in the fund name and it is in a separate column. Does that make sense? Also the problem is that the brokerage name can be shortened in the fund name for example, so it needn't be the same as the column of the brokerage. In a more general sense I want to remove from the non deciding columns the information of the deciding columns. So the program basically goes for a query "this looks like ISHARES fund, I am going to look at ISHARES funds. Now let me look at the name, this name is most similar to this other name that I have in said column". The non deciding columns I don't think they should be merged because I could make a query that doesn't provide so much data and is just the name of the fund and the brokerage. Will that be a problem or is something that semantic searching handles already?
CHAT-GPT: I’m pulling the official docs for the exact open-source pieces so the build plan matches what actually exists.
Thought for 33s
Build it as a local hybrid search app: Streamlit for the UI, openpyxl for Excel import/export, SentenceTransformers for embeddings, Faiss for vector search, and RapidFuzz for alias/fuzzy matching on brokerage names. Streamlit is open source and gives you file upload, expanders, session state, and caching; SentenceTransformers maps text to embeddings and rerankers; Faiss is for dense-vector similarity search and can store indexes on disk; openpyxl reads and writes .xlsx files.
1) Set up the project
Create a virtual environment and install: streamlit, openpyxl, sentence-transformers, faiss-cpu, and rapidfuzz. Keep it local, no paid APIs. Do not train a model from scratch. SentenceTransformers already provides pretrained models and the tooling for embeddings and reranking.
2) Define the data model first
Treat every row as one record with these pieces:
the original Excel row
the columns the user marks as “deciding”
the cleaned text used for semantic search
the raw text used for display
an alias list for the brokerage/fund family
a timestamp for recency sorting
That split matters. Do not collapse everything into one undifferentiated string and hope the model sorts it out.
3) Solve the repeated brokerage problem by preprocessing
This is the key point. If the brokerage appears both in the fund name and in its own column, semantic search will not automatically “subtract” that repeated information for you. Your preprocessing should remove deciding-column content from the text that gets embedded, while keeping the original values for filtering and display. That is a design rule, not a built-in feature of embeddings. SentenceTransformers helps with semantic meaning, abbreviations, and misspellings, but it does not enforce business rules like “never mix Vanguard with iShares.”
Use this rule:
original row stays untouched
search text is a cleaned version
deciding columns are stored separately
display text can still show the full row
Example:
brokerage = ISHARES
fund name = ISHARES CORE S&P 500 UCITS ETF
search text = CORE S&P 500 UCITS ETF
That way the model searches the real fund description, not the duplicated label.
4) Build an alias layer for brokerages and families
This is where RapidFuzz helps. Its token_set_ratio compares strings by common and unique words, and it returns a perfect score when one string is basically contained in the other; WRatio combines multiple fuzzy methods. That is useful when the brokerage is shortened in the fund name or written slightly differently in the column.
So build a small alias table:
ISHARES
I SHARES
ISHR
BLACKROCK
whatever variants appear in your data
Then, for each row and each query:
normalize case
strip accents
remove punctuation
compare against the alias table
assign the row/query to a brokerage family when confidence is high
That gives you the “look at iShares funds first” behavior.
5) Keep the non-deciding columns, but structure them
Do not merge non-deciding columns blindly. Merge them into one labeled document per row, not one flat blob. Example:
name: ... | region: ... | currency: ... | strategy: ... | share class: ...
This helps when a query is short and only mentions some of the fields. Semantic search is good at matching incomplete phrasing, abbreviations, and misspellings, so a short query is not a problem by itself. The problem is when the repeated deciding info pollutes the text.
6) Build the search index
Turn each cleaned row into an embedding with SentenceTransformers, then store all vectors in Faiss. Faiss is specifically built for efficient similarity search over dense vectors, supports returning the top k nearest neighbors, and can store the index on disk rather than only in RAM. For 45K rows, a simple flat index is already a reasonable first version; Faiss is designed for much larger vector sets too. That last sentence is an inference from Faiss’s design and capabilities.
Use a flat index first. Only move to a more complex approximate index later if you outgrow it. Faiss supports several families of indexes, including inverted-file and product-quantization methods, but you do not need that complexity at 45K rows.
7) Search flow for each query
For each pasted query line:
normalize the query
detect likely brokerage/family via aliases and fuzzy matching
optionally filter rows to that family
embed the query
ask Faiss for the top N semantic candidates
rerank those candidates using business rules
The reranker should combine:
semantic similarity
exact/near-exact match on deciding columns
penalty if the brokerage family conflicts
bonus for exact fund name, ticker, ISIN, or other exact identifiers
That hybrid approach is the whole solution. Pure embeddings are too soft for your use case; pure string matching is too brittle.
8) Build the interface in Streamlit
Use:
st.file_uploader for the Excel import button
a small control for “results per query”
checkboxes for deciding columns after import
a multiline paste box at the bottom
st.expander for each query result block
a global “collapse all” toggle stored in session state
Streamlit’s expander is made for collapsible blocks, and session state is the right tool for keeping UI state across reruns. Streamlit reruns the script on interaction, so caching is important for the expensive parts.
9) Persist everything outside Streamlit session state
Do not rely on session state for long-term storage. Streamlit session state is only for the active session and is lost when the tab closes or the server restarts. Save the durable pieces to disk instead: the cleaned dataset, the alias table, the Faiss index, the query history, the chosen deciding columns, and the last UI settings. Faiss has explicit read/write index functions, so the vector index can be saved and restored.
Use this persistence layout:
data/original.xlsx
data/cleaned_rows.json or .csv
data/index.faiss
data/settings.json
data/history.json or SQLite
If you want an Excel output sheet later, openpyxl can write a workbook back to disk.
10) Make recency and alphabetical sorting trivial
Store each query submission with a timestamp. Then sort the saved query blocks either:
alphabetically by query text
by most recent first
That is a presentation-layer feature, not a search problem.
11) Make it fast enough
Use caching aggressively. The model load should be cached as a resource; the cleaned dataframe and embeddings should be cached as data. Streamlit’s caching APIs are made for this. For 45K rows, rebuilding embeddings every time would be unnecessary; build once per uploaded database, then reuse the saved index.
12) The simplest correct build order
Do it in this order:
import one Excel sheet
show columns
let the user choose deciding columns
clean the text
build embeddings
build Faiss index
accept pasted queries
show top matches in collapsed result blocks
save state to disk
add recency/alphabetical sorting
add better alias handling
add better reranking
Direct answer to your last question
Yes, semantic search helps with short queries, abbreviations, and messy text. No, it does not automatically solve the repeated-brokerage problem. The fix is to remove deciding-column information from the embedded text, keep it as metadata, and use it as a filter or reranking signal. That is the correct structure for your data.
MY QUESTION: I still don't understand how I would remove the deciding stuff from the non deciding columns since the deciding stuff in the non deciding stuff could be shortened or placed somewhere that is not exactly the beginning and stuff like that. Moreover, if I have many deciding columns whose information is in the non deciding columns, having the aliases database is daunting and very manual
CHAT-GPT: The right fix is not a giant manual alias list. It is automatic field separation plus conservative text cleaning, so repeated deciding info stops influencing ranking.
Thought for 18s
Do not try to perfectly delete the deciding information from the text by hand. That is the wrong problem. You do not need a perfect “remove all broker names from all fund names” pipeline.
Use this structure instead:
1) Treat every row as two layers
For each row, build:
structured metadata: deciding columns exactly as they appear in the sheet
search text: the remaining text that you actually embed
The key point is that the deciding columns do not need to be physically erased from the database. They only need to be separated from the text that drives semantic ranking.
So the question is not “how do I perfectly remove every deciding piece from the free-text columns?”
The question is “how do I stop repeated deciding information from dominating the embedding?”
That is much easier.

2) Use the deciding columns to build a “signature”
For each row, create a canonical signature from the deciding columns, for example:
brokerage = iShares
family = iShares Core
issuer = BlackRock
This signature is stored separately. Then, when a query comes in, you compare the query against that signature first.
So for a query like:
iShares S&P 500 UCITS ETF
you do not need to strip every iShares occurrence from the fund name perfectly. You just detect that the query strongly points to the iShares family and use that family to filter or heavily boost rows with the same family.
That already solves most of the problem.

3) Do not rely on manual aliases alone
You are right that a giant alias database is annoying.
So do this instead:
For each deciding column, keep the exact value from the sheet.
Automatically generate a few normalized forms of it:
lowercase
remove punctuation
remove spaces
accent-stripped version
token-sorted version
When a query arrives, compare the query against these normalized forms with fuzzy matching.
This gives you automatic handling of shortened or slightly altered names without manually listing every alias.
Example:
ISHARES
I SHARES
iShares
ISHRS
All of these become close after normalization and fuzzy comparison.
So the “alias database” becomes mostly automatic, not manual.

4) The fund-name contamination problem is handled by scoring, not deletion
Suppose the fund name column contains:
ISHARES CORE MSCI WORLD UCITS ETF
and the brokerage column also says ISHARES.
You do not need to remove ISHARES from the fund name perfectly.
Instead:
the embedding sees the text
the search retrieves candidates
the reranker checks the brokerage signature
If the query looks like iShares, iShares rows get boosted.
If the query looks like Vanguard, Vanguard rows get penalized.
That means repeated information in the name becomes harmless, because the deciding-column match controls the final ranking.
This is the correct design.

5) The non-deciding columns should be cleaned, not merged blindly
For each row, build a search document like this:
name: CORE MSCI WORLD UCITS ETF | region: Global | asset class: Equity | currency: USD | ...
But before embedding, remove obvious copied fragments from that document using row-local cleaning.
Row-local cleaning means:
take the deciding values from that same row
compare them against the free-text fields
remove only the parts that are clearly near-duplicates
This is not a manual alias list. This is automatic per-row cleanup.

6) How row-local cleaning works in practice
For each deciding value, generate a small set of candidate variants automatically:
exact form
no spaces
no punctuation
token-normalized
prefix forms
Then search for those variants inside the free-text string.
If you find a strong match, remove it.
So for a row with deciding value ISHARES, and free text:
ISHARES CORE S&P 500 UCITS ETF
you remove ISHARES.
If the text says I SHARES, normalization catches it.
If the text says ISHRS, fuzzy matching catches it.
That is still manageable because it is done per row, using the row’s own deciding values, not a global manual alias table.

7) You do not need to remove every weak mention
This matters a lot.
If the deciding info appears in the non-deciding text in a slightly different form and you cannot match it confidently, leave it there.
Why? Because the real control comes from the structured reranker, not from perfect cleaning.
Trying to delete every possible disguised mention is a trap. It makes the system brittle and overcomplicated.
Better rule:
remove only high-confidence repetitions
keep uncertain text
let the reranker decide
That is robust.

8) For very short queries, semantic search is not enough by itself
You asked whether short queries like “fund name + brokerage only” are a problem.
Yes, they are a problem if you use embeddings alone.
But they are not a problem in the hybrid design.
For short queries:
detect brokerage/family first
restrict candidates to the right family
run semantic search inside that family
rerank with exact deciding-field match
So the system behaves like:
“this looks like iShares → search iShares rows first → now compare fund descriptions”
That is exactly what you want.

9) The cleanest design is this
Do not think in terms of “delete deciding stuff from non-deciding stuff.”
Think in terms of:
structured identity
semantic description
automatic family detection
candidate filtering
final reranking
That avoids the need for a huge alias list.

10) The practical rule you should implement
For each row:
Read the deciding columns.
Create a canonical family label from them.
Clean the free-text fields by removing only high-confidence repeats of those deciding values.
Embed the cleaned text.
Store the deciding values separately.
At query time, detect the family from the query.
Restrict or boost rows with matching family.
Rank the survivors by semantic similarity.
That is the full solution.

Bottom line
The deciding information does not have to be perfectly removed from the text. It only has to be separated and de-emphasized.
The alias problem does not have to be manually solved. It can be handled with automatic normalization, fuzzy matching, and reranking.
Semantic search by itself does not solve this, but semantic search plus structured filters does.
MY QUESTION: Can I do all this in vscode? How do I setup everything I will need for the project?
CHAT-GPT: I’m checking the official setup docs so the steps line up with what VS Code and the libraries actually support.
Thought for 5s
Yes. VS Code is enough for this project. It is an editor/debugger; the actual runtime is Python plus the packages you install into a local environment. Microsoft’s Python docs say you need to install a Python interpreter separately from the extension, and VS Code supports working with virtual environments directly.
Setup from scratch
1) Install the base tools
Install:
Python 3.10+
VS Code
the Python extension in VS Code
optionally Conda if you want the smoothest Faiss install path, because Faiss’s official docs recommend conda install -c pytorch faiss-cpu for CPU use.
2) Create one project folder
Make a folder like:
fund-search/
Open that folder in VS Code.
3) Create an isolated environment
Use a virtual environment so the project does not pollute your global Python install. Python’s venv module is for lightweight isolated environments with their own packages.
From the VS Code terminal:
python -m venv .venv
Activate it:
Windows:
.venv\Scripts\activate
macOS/Linux:
source .venv/bin/activate
Then in VS Code, select that interpreter. VS Code’s Python docs show environment selection and working with virtual environments from the Python sidebar.
4) Install the packages
Inside the activated environment, install the core stack:
pip install streamlit openpyxl sentence-transformers rapidfuzz
SentenceTransformers’ docs recommend Python 3.10+ and PyTorch 1.11+; its default install supports loading models and inference. Streamlit’s install docs use pip install streamlit.
For Faiss, the cleanest official route is Conda:
conda install -c pytorch faiss-cpu
Faiss’s docs also note that faiss-gpu is for CUDA-enabled indices, but you do not need that for your first version.
If you want everything in one environment manager, use Conda for the whole project instead of venv. VS Code works with both Python environments and Conda-style setups.
5) Make the basic file structure
Create this:
fund-search/
 app.py
 search_engine.py
 data/
 cache/
 saved_state/
Use:
app.py for the Streamlit UI
search_engine.py for embeddings, cleaning, Faiss search, reranking
data/ for uploaded Excel copies
saved_state/ for the index and settings
6) Add a minimal test app first
Before building the search logic, verify Streamlit works:
# app.py
import streamlit as st

st.title("Fund search")
st.write("Working")
Run it with Streamlit’s standard launch command:
streamlit run app.py
That is the normal workflow in Streamlit’s own getting-started docs.
7) Then add the real dependencies one by one
Add them in this order:
Excel loading with openpyxl
column selection UI in Streamlit
text cleaning
SentenceTransformer embeddings
Faiss indexing
query input and result display
saving state on disk
That order matters because each step is testable on its own.
8) Keep the project reproducible
Create a requirements.txt once it works:
pip freeze > requirements.txt
If you use Conda, also save an environment.yml. That makes reinstalling the exact setup much easier.
9) Use VS Code features that help
Use:
the terminal inside VS Code
the debugger
Python IntelliSense
automatic environment selection
VS Code’s Python docs explicitly support running, debugging, and using virtual environments in the editor.
Practical recommendation for your project
Use VS Code + Conda + Streamlit + SentenceTransformers + Faiss + openpyxl + RapidFuzz.
That is the least painful path because:
Streamlit gives you the UI quickly.
SentenceTransformers gives you pretrained semantic embeddings without training from scratch.
Faiss gives you fast vector search.
openpyxl handles .xlsx files.
The first thing to do in VS Code is: create the environment, install the packages, run a tiny Streamlit test, then start coding the import and search pipeline.
MY QUESTION: Ok, now give me the end to end project step by step taking all the information mentioned above to provide a long response putting the details accurately from scratch everything, super detail. Notice that I want it to be a downloadble .exe. So my final project has to be able to be converted into a .exe
CHAT-GPT: I’m verifying the packaging path first, because the .exe part changes the architecture a bit.
Thought for 36s
Yes. Build it in VS Code, then package it into a Windows .exe at the end. The clean architecture is: a Python Streamlit app for the UI, SentenceTransformers for embeddings, Faiss for vector search, openpyxl for Excel input/output, and PyInstaller to bundle everything. Streamlit is a client-server app where Python is the backend server and the browser is the frontend client; PyInstaller bundles a Python application together with its interpreter and dependencies into a single package or executable, and it is not a cross-compiler, so you build the Windows .exe on Windows.
0) What the final deliverable actually is
The final product should be a local desktop launcher that opens your search app. In practice, the executable starts a local Streamlit server and opens a browser tab to show the interface, because that is how Streamlit runs. It is not a native Tkinter-style window; it is a browser-based app launched by an .exe. That is the right tradeoff here because your UI is data-heavy, collapsible, and interactive.
1) The exact stack to use
Use this stack:
VS Code as editor and debugger. VS Code supports Python environments and virtual-environment selection directly.
Python 3.10+. SentenceTransformers recommends Python 3.10+ and PyTorch 1.11+.
Streamlit for the interface. It has file upload, expanders, session state, and layout primitives that match your UI.
openpyxl for reading and writing .xlsx files.
SentenceTransformers for semantic embeddings and semantic-search models.
Faiss for fast nearest-neighbor search over dense vectors.
RapidFuzz for fuzzy matching on brokerage/family aliases. I did not re-check RapidFuzz docs here, so treat that as implementation advice rather than a sourced claim.
For the embedding model, start with a small semantic-search model such as multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1 or a general model like all-MiniLM-L6-v2. SentenceTransformers documents both general-purpose and semantic-search-specific models, and notes that all-MiniLM-L6-v2 is about 5× faster than all-mpnet-base-v2 while still giving good quality.
2) Folder structure
Create one project folder and keep it boring:
fund-search/
 app.py
 search_engine.py
 data_loader.py
 state_store.py
 launcher.py
 requirements.txt
 models/
   sentence_transformer_model/
 saved_state/
 data/
 icons/
 build/
The important part is that the model folder and persistent state are kept separate. The model can be bundled or shipped with the app. The state should live in a user-writable location, not inside the temporary extraction folder used by one-file executables. PyInstaller’s runtime docs say one-file mode extracts bundled files to a temporary _MEIPASS location at runtime.
3) Environment setup in VS Code
Step 3.1 — Install tools
Install:
Python 3.10 or newer
VS Code
Python extension in VS Code
VS Code’s Python docs explicitly expect you to install a Python interpreter separately, then select it inside VS Code.
Step 3.2 — Create an isolated environment
Use a virtual environment or Conda environment. Python’s venv module creates isolated environments, and VS Code supports selecting them.
If you use venv:
python -m venv .venv
Activate it, then install dependencies.
Step 3.3 — Install dependencies
Use:
pip install streamlit openpyxl sentence-transformers rapidfuzz pyinstaller
For Faiss, the official docs recommend Conda:
conda install -c pytorch faiss-cpu
Faiss also provides faiss-gpu, but you do not need that for a first local desktop version.
Step 3.4 — Verify the app runs
Run a tiny Streamlit file first:
import streamlit as st
st.title("Fund search")
Then launch it with:
streamlit run app.py
Streamlit says this starts a local server and opens the app in a browser tab.
4) Build the app in stages, not all at once
Do not start with embeddings. Start with the shell.
Stage A — UI shell
Build the empty interface first:
import button at the top right
reset button at the top right
results-per-query control at the top left
deciding-columns checklist after import
collapsed result blocks in the center
paste box at the bottom
Use Streamlit widgets for this. st.file_uploader handles the Excel file picker, st.expander gives you collapsible blocks, and session state handles per-session UI state across reruns.
Stage B — Read the Excel file
Use openpyxl to load the workbook and the chosen worksheet. openpyxl is a Python library for reading and writing Excel .xlsx/.xlsm files.
Your loader should:
read headers
read every row into a Python dict
preserve the original values exactly
store row index numbers for stable identification
Do not mutate the raw data. Keep raw and cleaned versions side by side.
Stage C — Let the user mark deciding columns
After import, show every column name with a checkbox. The user checks the ones that are identity-defining: broker, issuer, family, ticker, ISIN, share class, or anything else that should dominate ranking.
This is the key part of your design. You are not asking the model to guess business logic. You are giving it business logic explicitly.
Stage D — Clean each row before embedding
This is the heart of the “repeated brokerage” problem.
Do not try to manually maintain a giant alias table for every possible brokerage spelling. Instead, for each row:
take the deciding columns
normalize them automatically
compare them against the free-text fields in that same row
remove only high-confidence repetitions
keep uncertain text
The clean version is what gets embedded. The original version stays for display and exact checks.
A practical rule is:
If a deciding value appears clearly inside a descriptive field, remove it.
If the match is fuzzy or ambiguous, keep it.
Let reranking handle the rest.
This avoids the brittle “manual alias database” problem.
Stage E — Create embeddings
SentenceTransformers loads a pretrained model and maps text to embeddings. Its docs describe semantic-search models specifically trained for search queries and passages, and general-purpose models that can also be used for embeddings.
For your project:
embed the cleaned text
keep the deciding metadata separate
keep the original row for display
The best first model choice is a small semantic-search model such as multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1 or a general-purpose one such as all-MiniLM-L6-v2. SentenceTransformers documents both families and notes that smaller MiniLM models are substantially faster.
Stage F — Build the Faiss index
Once you have one vector per row, put them into Faiss. Faiss is explicitly for efficient similarity search over dense vectors. For a first version, use the simplest index that works; the library is designed to scale beyond that later. That “start simple” advice is my engineering recommendation, not a formal Faiss requirement.
For 45K rows, a simple local index is the correct starting point. The important thing is that the index is saved to disk and reloaded on startup rather than recomputed every time.
Stage G — Query pipeline
For each pasted query line:
normalize the query text
detect likely deciding-column matches from the query
embed the query
retrieve top candidates from Faiss
rerank those candidates using deciding-column match strength
show the final list
The reranker is what makes “ISHARES query should not rank VANGUARD first” actually work. The embedding handles semantics. The structured reranker handles identity.
5) How to handle the deciding info hidden inside fund names
This is the part you were stuck on.
Do not think in terms of “remove every deciding word from every descriptive field perfectly.” That is unnecessary and will become a mess.
Use this instead:
Level 1 — Automatic family detection
Build a canonical representation for each deciding column value:
lowercase
strip punctuation
remove repeated spaces
remove accents
maybe create a token-sorted variant
When a query comes in, compare the query against those canonical forms. Use exact match first, then fuzzy match. RapidFuzz is well suited for this kind of near-match problem in text. I am not re-citing RapidFuzz here, so treat that as implementation guidance.
Level 2 — Row-specific cleaning
For each row, compare its own deciding values against its own descriptive text. Remove the obvious repeated parts only.
Example:
deciding column: ISHARES
fund name: ISHARES CORE S&P 500 UCITS ETF
cleaned search text: CORE S&P 500 UCITS ETF
If the name contains a shortened form, fuzzy normalization catches it. If it is too messy to trust, do not remove it; just let reranking handle it.
Level 3 — Structured reranking
When the query looks like an iShares query, boost rows whose deciding metadata says iShares. When it looks like Vanguard, boost Vanguard rows. That means the repeated label in the fund name becomes much less important than the structured family match.
That is the correct solution. The model is not responsible for knowing business identity; your metadata is.
6) The UI behavior you described
Implement these behaviors:
Import button at top right using st.file_uploader. Streamlit’s uploader sends uploaded data into Python memory; the app only sees files uploaded through that widget.
Reset button to clear session state and wipe the current screen.
Results-per-query control at top left.
Checkboxes for deciding columns after import.
Paste area at the bottom with one query per line.
Collapsed result blocks in the middle using st.expander. Streamlit’s expander is exactly a collapsible container.
Collapse all control that toggles all blocks at once.
Alphabetical / recency sort for saved queries.
Persistent history that survives closing the program.
For persistence, do not rely only on st.session_state. Streamlit’s session state persists across reruns and multipage pages for a user session, but it is still session-scoped. Save the durable data to disk.
7) What to save to disk
Save these things:
the imported workbook metadata
the cleaned row records
the embedding index
the chosen deciding columns
the alias/normalization data
the query history
the UI settings
Save them in a user-writable folder outside the bundle. Do not write permanent state into the PyInstaller temporary extraction directory, because one-file bundles unpack there at runtime. PyInstaller’s runtime docs explain that bundled resources are available via sys._MEIPASS, which is not the place for long-term user data.
8) Model handling for the .exe
Do not make the user download a model the first time unless you want a fragile offline story. SentenceTransformers can load a model from a local path on disk, not only from Hugging Face. Its docs say that if the path is local, it loads from that path; otherwise it tries to download a pretrained model.
So the better plan is:
install and test the model during development
copy the model folder into your project
package that folder as data with the executable
PyInstaller supports adding data files with --add-data or with the datas= section of a spec file. It also supports --hidden-import, additional hooks, and runtime hooks for packages that use dynamic imports.
9) How to structure the packaging layer
Make a small launcher.py whose job is only to:
find the bundled paths correctly
start the Streamlit app
open the browser if needed
Because PyInstaller may extract bundled files to a temporary folder in one-file mode, use a helper that points to sys._MEIPASS when frozen and to the source folder otherwise. That is the standard PyInstaller runtime pattern.
Conceptually:
from pathlib import Path
import sys

def resource_path(relative_path: str) -> Path:
   base = Path(getattr(sys, "_MEIPASS", Path(__file__).resolve().parent))
   return base / relative_path
Use that helper to locate:
app.py
the model folder
icons
template files
10) The build path that actually works
Build in this order:
First build: development version
Run the app directly from VS Code:
import Excel
pick deciding columns
enter queries
show results
save history
Do not package yet.
Second build: one-folder package
Use PyInstaller in folder mode first, because it is easier to debug than one-file mode. PyInstaller’s docs say it bundles the app and its interpreter into a folder or a single executable.
Third build: one-file executable
After the folder build works, switch to one-file. One-file is what produces the clean “double-click this .exe” experience, but it extracts to a temp folder at runtime.
Fourth build: clean Windows release
Test on a clean Windows machine or a clean VM. PyInstaller is not a cross-compiler, so the release should be built on Windows if the target is Windows.
11) The actual packaging command shape
The exact command will depend on your file layout, but the logic is:
package launcher.py
include app.py and search_engine.py as data if they are not imported normally
include your model directory
include icons/config files
include any extra hook files if needed
PyInstaller’s spec-file docs support adding data files and binaries explicitly, which is the clean way to ship non-code resources with the app.
A typical development flow is:
pyinstaller launcher.py
Then, once it works, move to a spec file and add data paths for the model and app resources.
12) The one thing that matters most for performance
Do not recompute embeddings every time the app starts unless the database changed. Cache the processed dataset and the Faiss index to disk, and reload them at startup. SentenceTransformers also documents inference-speed considerations and notes that model choice affects speed significantly. Streamlit also provides fragments and session state because reruns are part of its execution model, so caching expensive work is essential.
13) The safest “minimum viable” production version
Your first shippable version should do only this:
import .xlsx
choose deciding columns
build one local index
accept multiple pasted queries
return top k matches
collapse results by query
save history
reload history on start
package as .exe
Nothing more.
After that works, add:
better alias detection
better reranking
export results to Excel
saved presets for deciding columns
search filters
ranked result explanations
14) What the finished app should feel like
The final experience is:
user double-clicks the .exe
browser opens locally
user imports the Excel database
user marks the deciding columns
app builds the index once
user pastes many queries
each query gets its own collapsed result block
app ranks by family and semantic similarity, not just word overlap
results and settings survive restarts
That is the full end-to-end path from zero to a distributable Windows executable.

